Using our AgentBuilder Pro software product, we have implemented and tested a
simple, agent-based electronic auction for buying and selling electric power.

This white paper describes the design of a prototypi-cal
electronic marketplace for buying and selling electric power. We also devel-oped
a simple demonstration system to show the operation of the agents and the
marketplace.

The distributed, multiple agent approach is significantly more useful than a cen-tral
server, since individual agent behaviors are under the control of the stake-holder
and not subject to the rules and constraints of a central authority.

Intelligent Agents in the Power Industry
Intelligent software agents are a new class of software that act on behalf of the user
to find and filter information, negotiate for services, easily automate complex tasks,
or collaborate with other software agents to solve complex problems.

A software agent is viewed as an autono-mous
software construction; i.e., one that is capable of executing without user
intervention.

We define a software agent as a software component that:
• executes autonomously
• communicates with other agents or the user
• monitors the state of its execution environment

Agents and Agency
While agents are useful and powerful computational entities and a single agent can
be used to perform a wide variety of tasks, agents are most useful when multiple
agents communicate, cooperate and collaborate to solve complex problems. A col-lection
of agents that work together to provide some service is called an agency.

These agents communicate and cooperate with each other to implement an elec-tronic
marketplace. In this marketplace, agents with excess electric power auction
power to agents who need to purchase power. Likewise, an agent that needs to pur-chase
power can initiate an auction to buy power from other agents who have
excess capacity.

Agency - Market Operation
The proposed energy market will consist of an agency of buyers and suppliers inter-acting
directly to establish bilateral contracts for the sale and delivery of energy.
Information is provided to all participants via a public forum,

The market will operate continuously under a pro-cess
having three basic stages:
• Auction
• Transaction Definition
• Transaction Execution

Stage 1: Auction
Buyers and suppliers/sellers are matched using a modified Dutch auction format.
In this format both buyers and sellers may conduct an auction session by posting
buy/sell information in a public forum

Buyers and sellers conduct individual Dutch auction sessions using the public
forum without the assistance or oversight of an auctioneer. The process begins
when the auctioning party (buyer or seller) posts auction information (e.g., amount
and timing of the capacity (for sale or purchase), price, auction session identifier,
minimum acceptable contract quantity, etc.). The auctioning party is not responsi-ble
for calculating delivery costs (transmission) since this depends on the physical
location of the bidder, which is not known to the auctioning party at the time of
posting.

In accordance with the Dutch auction format, the price of the next posting during
the auction session is modified using a known price modifier.

Stage 2: Transaction Definition
Prospective bidders access the public information and evaluate information on the
various auction sessions relative to their needs. If a decision is made to bid then
bids are electronically submitted directly to the auctioning party

Transaction information relative to the price and starting time of
the energy delivery are set in the auction posting so only the quantity and duration
of the delivery need to be identified in order to fully define the transaction.

Stage 3: Transaction Execution
Transaction execution is a two step process. The first step requires that the auction-ing
party check the transaction for system feasibility. This is accomplished using
the system power model and information on transactions already recorded (as read
from the web site). If a transaction appears feasible then it is posted as a “pending’
transaction on the Auction web site. The auctioning party checks and posts each
transaction separately until all transactions have been entered. Larger transactions
are checked and executed first (to maximize income).

The second step of the transaction execution process involves final system
approval. As currently envisioned this function will be provided by the OASIS /
Auction web site itself. Pending transactions will be evaluated for system feasibil-ity
in the order that they are received. Feasible transactions are approved and move
from a “pending” to “recorded” status.

Buyer/Supplier Agent Types
Under the proposed market format both buyers (energy users) and suppliers may
conduct auction sessions. Therefore, market participants have the option to:
• Conduct an auction session and wait for bidders to approach them,
• Review and subsequently bid into the various auction sessions, or
• Both conduct an auction session and bid into the auctions of others.

1. Agent Configuration
Seller Agents           Buyer Agents
Auctioning Supplier   Bidding Supplier
Auctioning User       Bidding User

Auctioning Agent Description
An auctioning agent conducts auction sessions as needed to fulfill its energy
requirements. Both buyers and sellers/suppliers may conduct auctions. The basic
auction process is similar in both cases.

The auctioning process starts with a status evaluation that includes:
1. Establishing the buyer/seller capacity needs (whether it is the anticipated gener-ation
capacity or a user’s expected load).
2. Checking the status of all potential transactions previously recorded by the
buyer/seller that have yet to be transacted (e.g., energy delivery/acceptance is
still in the future, etc.). Some transactions may have changed status due to
transmission system problems and it may now be necessary to open a new auc-tion
session to accommodate the change.
3. Identifying any auctions that the buyer/seller is currently conducting.
4. Checking transmission system status (availability and cost).

The auctioning party can attempt to eliminate the bid collision problem by:
• equitably distributing the capacity amongst the bidders, or
• selecting bidders that are the most advantageous to the auctioning party (i.e., a
single large transaction versus many smaller ones, etc.).

Bidding Agent Description
By definition, a bidding agent will always fulfill their energy needs by participating
in the auctions of other agents. Both buyers and sellers/suppliers may bid into the
auctions of others with the process being very similar in both cases.

The bidding process begins with a status evaluation that includes:
1. Establishing the buyer/seller capacity needs (whether it is the anticipated gener-ation
capacity or a user’s expected load).
2. Checking the status of all potential transactions previously recorded by the
buyer/seller not yet transacted (e.g., energy delivery/acceptance is still in the
future, etc.). Some transactions may have changed status due to transmission
system problems and it may now be necessary fill this capacity from current
auctions.

Initially, the bidding agent will use the following procedure to select auctions and
formulate bids:
1. Select auctions with the best price first (lowest price for buyer, highest price for
supplier). If two auctions have an equal price then the bidding agent will give
preference to the auction providing the largest transaction size. If competing
auctions have both the same price and transaction size then preference would be
given to the auction involving the least amount of transmission system assets.
2. Select the maximum bid size that can be accommodated by the auctioning party
up to the bidding agent’s total requirement (i.e., obtain all of the needed capac-ity
from a single auction if possible).
3. Modify the bids to insure that no bid is below the minimum acceptable transac-tion
size. This will be accomplished by reducing the size of other bids in the
reverse order as noted in 1 above (least favorable bids are reduced first).

Agent information can be classified into three basic types: predictions, status, and
historical.

Bidder Defections
Bidder defection is when a bidder backs out of a transaction prior to its execution.

Roles and Functions of Buyer/Seller Agent (BSA)
Role    Function  Description
Buyer  Auctioneer  Buy power
Seller Auctioneer Supply power
Buyer  Bidder      Buy Power
Seller Bidder     Supply Power

Each BSA exhibits unique and individual behavior determined by its own unique
economic and behavioral model. There are three components of each agent’s
behavior. These are:
• buying/selling strategy
• market supply/demand characteristics
• operational power quantity requirements

The Market Place
The market consists of a combination of buyer and seller agents taking on roles as
either bidders or auctioneers.
The agents are each assigned a role (as buyer or seller
and auctioneer or bidder) by the demonstration operator using the GIA.

GIA:Grid Interface Agent

Agent Communication
In order to perform their individual tasks, each agent must communicate with other
agents in the agency. The following paragraphs provide an overview of the commu-nication
between the various agents in the auction agency.

Auction Sessions
Once the Buyer/Seller Agents are properly set up and ready to begin execution, the
auction session cycle begins.

Interface Description
The Experiment Control Agent provides a graphical user interface to control the
simulated auction session and view the results as they are generated. Figure 10
illustrates the user interface.

Control Panel Buttons
The Control Panel contains five buttons that are used to control the operation of the
software. Any of the buttons may be pressed at any time during the auction. The
software checks for button presses at the end of each auction session. The last but-ton
pressed in an auction session is the button press that is used for subsequent pro-cessing.
If more than one button is pressed or a button is pressed multiple times
during an auction session, all but the last press will be ignored.

Buyer Status Information
The Buyer text panel contains information for one buyer and a specific hour. The
panel contains a combo box that allows the user to select any of the buyers in the
agency. The panel also contains a text field that allows the user to specify the deliv-ery
hour of the day. The delivery hour is an integer between zero and 23.

Agent Information
A block of static agent information is the first information written to the log file.
There is a one-line header for the block containing the “Agent Information” label.
This is followed by smaller blocks of text for each of the Buyer/Seller Agents. Each
of the smaller blocks contains eight lines of text.

Session Information
A block of session information is written to the log file at the end of each auction
session. The information in this block represents activity in only the auction session
identified and is not a running total across multiple sessions.

Overall Market Information
A block of overall market information is written to the log file at the end of each
auction session. The information in this block represents a running total of overall
market activity. There are three lines of header information for a block of overall
market information.

Running the System
There are 5 basic operations performed with the Control Panel: Initializing, Step-ping,
Running, Stopping and Exiting.

The Auction Control Panel contains five buttons that are used to control the opera-tion
of the software.

There are four steps to the con-figuration
process; these are accomplished by completing the worksheets/tabs in
this workbook. The four basic steps are:
1. Auction Setup (session type, number of suppliers and buyers, and their energy
requirements/capacities).
2. Supplier Agent Setup (generation type, profit goal, and auction strategy).
3. Buyer Agent Setup (business type and bidding strategy).
4. Save Setup.

Distributing the Agents
Each agent runs in its own Java virtual machine, so it may be necessary when run-ning
the system in multi-agent mode to distribute the agents across multiple
machines. Several steps must be completed in order to distribute the agents. The
AgentBuilder manuals are included in the distribution and should be referenced for
more details about the distribution process.

